U.S. Geological Survey                                             seawat(1)



NAME
     SEAWAT - Three-dimensional variable-density ground-water flow model

ABSTRACT
The SEAWAT program was developed to simulate three-dimensional, variable-
density, transient ground-water flow in porous media. The source code for SEAWAT 
was developed by combining MODFLOW and MT3DMS into a single program that solves 
the coupled flow and solute-transport equations. The SEAWAT code follows a 
modular structure, and thus, new capabilities can be added with only minor 
modifications to the main program. SEAWAT reads and writes standard MODFLOW and 
MT3DMS data sets, although some extra input may be required for some SEAWAT 
simulations. This means that many of the existing pre- and postprocessors can be 
used to create input data sets and analyze simulation results. Users familiar 
with MODFLOW and MT3DMS should have little difficulty applying SEAWAT to 
problems of variable-density ground-water flow. 

MODFLOW was modified to solve the variable-density flow equation by 
reformulating the matrix equations in terms of fluid mass rather than fluid 
volume and by including the appropriate density terms. Fluid density is assumed 
to be solely a function of the concentration of dissolved constituents; the 
effects of temperature on fluid density are not considered. Temporally and 
spatially varying salt concentrations are simulated in SEAWAT using routines 
from the MT3DMS program. SEAWAT uses either an explicit or implicit procedure to 
couple the ground-water flow equation with the solute-transport equation.  With 
the explicit procedure, the flow equation is solved first for each timestep, and 
the resulting advective velocity field is then used in the solution to the 
solute-transport equation. This procedure for alternately solving the flow and 
transport equations is repeated until the stress periods and simulation are 
complete. With the implicit procedure for coupling, the flow and transport 
equations are solved multiple times for the same timestep until the maximum 
difference in fluid density between consecutive iterations is less than a user-
specified tolerance.

The SEAWAT code was tested by simulating five benchmark problems involving 
variable-density ground-water flow. These problems include two box problems, the 
Henry problem, Elder problem, and HYDROCOIN problem. The purpose of the box 
problems is to verify that fluid velocities are properly calculated by SEAWAT. 
For each of the box problems, SEAWAT calculates the appropriate velocity 
distribution. SEAWAT also accurately simulates the Henry problem, and SEAWAT 
results compare well with those of SUTRA. The Elder problem is a complex flow 
system in which fluid flow is driven solely by density variations. Results from 
SEAWAT, for six different times, compare well with results from Elder's original 
solution and results from SUTRA. The HYDROCOIN problem consists of fresh ground 
water flowing over a salt dome. Simulated contours of salinity compare well for 
SEAWAT and MOCDENSE.

METHOD
The variable-density ground-water flow equation is solved using a finite-
difference approximation similar to the one solved by MODFLOW-88.  The solute-
transport equation is solved using one of the approaches available with MT3DMS.

HISTORY

SEAWAT Version 2.11 2002/08/09 - Fixed bug that caused program to bomb 
for certain problems involving wetting drying.

SEAWAT Version 2.10 2002/02/07 - Code consists of MODFLOW-88 and MT3DMS Version 
3.50.A.  Upgraded the CFACE subroutine with the improved CFACE subroutine from 
MT3DMS Version 4.00.  Reformulated flow equation to conserve fluid mass.  
Redesigned boundary conditions to represent variable-density flow.  Added an 
iterative method for coupling flow and transport.  Program redesigned as double 
precision.

SEAWAT Version 1.1 1998/05/01 - Initially released by Weixing Guo (Missimer 
International, Inc.) and Gordon D. Bennett (S.S. Papadopulos & Associates, Inc.)

DATA REQUIREMENTS
In order to use SEAWAT, initial conditions, hydraulic properties, and stresses 
must be specified for every model cell in the finite-difference grid.

OUTPUT OPTIONS
Primary output is head and concentration, which can be written to the listing 
file or to separate binary files.  Other output includes the complete listing of 
all input data, drawdown, flow budget, and transport budget data.  Flow budget 
data are printed as a summary in the listing file, and detailed budget data for 
all model cells can be written into a separate file.  All binary output is 
written to files that are opened with the FORM='BINARY' option.  This means that 
some pre- and post-processors may not be able to read the output unless the open 
statements are modified, the program is recompiled, and the model is rerun.

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
SEAWAT is written in Fortran 77 with the following extensions: use of variable 
names longer than 6 characters, Fortran 90 statements for dynamic memory 
allocation, the DFLIB library and the DTIME function, and the FORM='BINARY' 
option with the open statement.  Generally, the program is easily installed on 
most computer systems.  The code has been used on personal computers with 
several different versions of the WINDOWS operating system.

PACKAGES
This version of SEAWAT includes the following packages:

BAS -- Basic Package
BCF2 -- Block-Centered Flow Package
WEL - Well Package
DRN - Drain Package
RIV - River Package
EVT - Evapotranspiration Package
GHB - General-Head Boundary Package
RCH - Recharge Package
SIP - Strongly Implicit Procedure
SOR - Successive Over-Relaxation
PCG2 - Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient Solver Package
OC - Output Control Option
CHD - Time-Variant Constant Head Package
LKMT3D - MT3D link package
BTN - Basic Transport Package
ADV - Advection Package
DSP - Dispersion Package
SSM - Source/Sink Mixing Package
RCT - Reaction Package
GCG - Generalized Conjugate Gradient Solver

TRAINING
None at time of release, but a course may be developed and offered through the 
USGS National Training Center.

CONTACTS
Operation:

Christian Langevin
U.S. Geological Survey
9100 NW 36th Street, STE 110
Miami, FL 33178
langevin@usgs.gov

Weixing Guo
CDM Missimer
8140 College Parkway, Suite 202
Fort Myers, Florida
guow@cdm.com


See
http://water.usgs.gov/software/ordering_documentation.html
for information on ordering printed copies of USGS publications.

